---
title: "Review: Perfection - Vincenzo Latronico"
taxon: "note"
created: "2025-05-25"
---

[Perfection](R-000_009) tries to describe the mundanity of millenial life.
Working remotely in a city you don't quite belong in, with friends
who come and go, having a relationship whose stability comes from complacence
rather than a shared profundity of experience,
and experiencing the world through a selective facade,
and participating in creating an illusion of yourself.

# Synopsis

The short novel follows the life of Anna and Tom, two young Italian
professionals who have created a freelance career for themselves in web
design, having moved away from their family to establish themselves in Berlin.

The novel opens with an embellished and precise description of a model
young creative's apartment.
The details are meticulously crafted, creating an impression of a couple
who express themselves through curated and tasteful items,
which are chaotic enough to make you feel the creativity of their curator,
while also organized and synergistic enough to never give you a glimpse
of any disorganization the occupants might have.

We then contrast this with the actual lives the couple leads.
This description is only of the Airbnb listing they have for their apartment,
which lets them fund the occasional vacation, most of which are spent
working, nonetheless, on their remote jobs.
While they portray and organized and fulfulling life on social media,
their actual apartment is usually in a state of disarray,
at its best moments being only in a state of organized decline.

Their lives are mostly unchanging, working on the same kinds of projects,
with no real career progression, exploring Berlin, hanging out with their
friend group.
No progression or particular events occurr as we follow their daily lives,
albeit a slow decay of their friend group, and a slow feeling of disappointment
they start to develop with their lives.

At the end of the novel, they decide to let out their apartment in Berlin for
half a year, with a plan to start this change of pace by working from Lisbon.
As they're there, they get the opportunity to own and renovate a rustic villa
back in their native Italy.

They take on their project, investing their creative efforts in the hope of
aligning the dreams they have of a perfect life with the reality they've been
living.

Their renovations come to an end, and they're able to show off the fruits of their
work to their friends, who appreciate the effort they've put in to making
their villa look straight out of a magazine feature.

After the party winds down, they're left with a messy house, and the same feeling
of disappointment and disillusionment they had in Berlin.

# Stagnation

The novel is short.
The bulk of it is the main chapter describing the couple's habits and their failed
attempt to curate a perfect life.
Rather than having progression, the novel portrays only regression.
We start with an idyllic picture of their apartment, wondering what amazing
lives its occupants must lead.
This picture is quickly shattered, as we look at the actual life they lead.
They're disorganized, but not in a particularly astounding way.
Their failures and success are mundane.

Their work came out of an initial passion they had for curating their
own social blogs.
They gained skills in application to their own pursuits, and then lended
them to friends, eventually developing a steady stream of professional work.
Their work never engrosses them completely, but does fill most of their days
with a steady hum.

The novelty of living in Berlin has decayed into a mundane familiarity.
They visit and explore the same areas, have the same partial impressions
of the city, and give the same advice to newcomers in the same position
as they once were.
The housing conditions of Berlin make them particularly attached to
their current apartment, whose free lease lets them keep the low price
they managed to lock down years ago.
The precarity and difficulty of finding a scarce apartment not already rented
forces many of their friends to eventually part ways with the city.

# Fraying social ties

A lot of their time is spent hanging out with their friend group.
No friends they have are named.
As a character, the friend group is an anonymous mass, whose members come and go.
Many of them find themselves with less time to hang out,
becoming busier with work, or having children, and growing apart from the protagonists.
Many of them are forced out of Berlin, for lack of an apartment,
for lack of a job.
These partings are frequent and ritual.
The leaving friend always promises to come back, at some undefined point in time,
where some undefined condition will change their lives.
They never come back.

The stagnation and decay they experience throughout life manifests itself
particularly in their social ties.
Their default state is not one of strengthening, but fraying.
Their friends are never guaranteed in real life.
The only tie that seems eternal is that of social media.
Their, friends can be "maintained" with little commitment,
but, conservely, these friendships are never particularly deep or committed.

# Lying to the world, and yourself

The novel has a very poignant description of how the couple lives their life
through social media.
We get a compelling description of how their daily routine is one of permanent
distraction.
Rather than taking breaks to check their feeds, and catch up on their friends,
they instead spending most of their time on algorithmic feeds,
scrolling up posts from strangers, designed to get them to spend the most time
they can on the websites.
Work, and even their personal lives, are the real breaks from the passive
scrolling.

A cognitive distance is created between the lives they actually lead,
and the lives they portend to lead online, and even to their friends and family.
They routinely embellish the life they lead to their family back home.
This isn't to make themselves seem very successful, but rather to assuage
the concerns their parents have, that they made the wrong choice
by moving away from their family.
They bend reality to make themselves seem more content, and not struggling
financially.

Their other friends do the same.
The friends they had before moving away have done the same, spreading themselves
around the globe.
They keep in touch through social media, but in the selective way the apps encourage.
They're aware of the cool and impressive aspects of the lives their friends lead,
and they participate in the same demonstrations online.
Their disappointments, their failures, their humanity: these aspects are not shared,
and they don't see them in their friends either.
This naturally leads to a stagnation of connection they have with their friends.

Intimacy in friendship requires vulnerability.
If you only share a curated life with your friends, you quickly run out of the ability
to connect any further, and your friends cannot develop into companions,
or people you can trust with life's difficulties.

Even worse, this lack of connection extends to their personal life.
They're not able or willing to discuss their relationship, to further it,
instead complacent and content with their situation.
They also delude themselves, individually.
The life they pretend to lead feels much more vivid than the destraction
of reality, that imposes itsels from time-to-time, making them realize
the disappointment they have, comparing their existence with the dreams they
try to share.


# Conclusion

One of the aims of the novel is to portray our modern condition,
trying to provide a kind of neutral "slice of life" analysis to capture the
essence of our age.

In doing so,
the description of the relation we have to social media, and its effect on our social
life, and even our perceptions of ourselves, is very poignant.
Few novels capture the pervasive distraction of social media, and how it feels
to be entranced around it, having it capture your psychic affectations.

The novel is quite short, and so if any of this analysis seems interesting, I would
recommend giving it a read.
