---
title: "Review: La Place - Annie Ernaux"
taxon: "note"
created: "2025-05-25"
---

[La Place](R-000_007) is a short novel by [Annie Ernaux](A-000_003), reflecting
on the relationship with her father, after his death.
The novel was awarded the Prix Goncourt in 1983.

# Synopsis

# Social Change

# Parents as Backdrop

It's natural to see yourself as the protagonist in your life.
This does not mean that other people are not perceived as being
independent actors, but rather that your personal experience emanates
from your own action, and other people naturally seem to be parts of the
world more so than they are parts of yourself.

This feeling of other people being permanent features of the world is no
more stronger than with your parents.
After we're born, our parents are immense.
They monopolize our experience, and it's likely that we're not yet capable
of even distinguishing them from the outside world in itself.
Of course, we do learn about other people, and that they experience
the world as we do.
Nonetheless, our parents seem to us as permanent giants, always there
to assist us if we need 
Even as we grow apart from them, maybe even move away, we always expect
to be able to come back and visit them.

The death of a parent thus naturally presents itself as a particularly
violent upheaval.
What we had imagined to be an immutable feature of the landscape
encircling our lives turns out to be mortal,
and fleeting, subject to the most immutable law governing life:
that it must end.


# Parsimony in Writing

# Conclusion
